Add measure offline usage guide (#4114)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/reliable/measuring-offline-usage/index.md

---
layout: post
title: Measuring offline usage
authors:
  - giesau
  - mschierle

> date: 2020-10-22
> tags:

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2020-10-22
description: >
  How to track offline usage so that you can make a case for why your site needs
  a better offline mode.
tags:
```
Forgot to add a description

  - offline
  - network
  - service-worker
  - metrics
---

This article shows you how to track offline usage of your site to help you make a case for why your
site needs a better offline mode. It also explains pitfalls and problems to avoid when implementing
offline usage analytics.

> ## The pitfalls of the online and offline browser events

Author: ```suggestion
## The pitfalls of the `online` and `offline` browser events
```

    the user is… well, offline.
+   Tracking a timestamp locally when a user goes offline and sending the offline activity to
    the analytics server when the user goes back online depends on the user revisiting your site.
    If the user drops off your site due to a lack of an offline mode and never revisits, you have
    no way to track that. The ability to track offline drop-offs is critical data for building a
    case about why your site needs a better offline mode.
+   The `online` event is not very reliable as it
    [only knows about network access](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/NavigatorOnLine/onLine),
    not internet access. Therefore a user might still be offline, and sending the tracking ping can
    still fail.
+   Even if the user still stays on the current page while being offline, none of the other
    analytics events (e.g. scroll events, clicks, etc.) are tracked either, which might be the more
    relevant and useful information.
+   Being offline in itself is also not too meaningful in general. As a website developer it may
    be more important to know what kinds of resources failed to load. This is especially relevant

>     in the context of SPAs, where a dropped network connection might not lead to a browser offline

Author: ```suggestion
    in the context of single-page apps (SPAs), where a dropped network connection might not lead to a browser offline
```
It's a good courtesy to define the acronym the first time we use it

    error page (which users understand) but more likely to random dynamic parts of the page failing
    silently.

You can still use this solution to gain a basic understanding of offline usage, but the many
drawbacks and limitations need to be considered carefully.

## A better approach: the service worker

The solution that enables offline mode turns out to be the better solution for tracking offline

> usage.  The basic idea is to store analytics pings into IndexedDB as long as the user is offline,

Author: ```suggestion
usage. The basic idea is to store analytics pings into IndexedDB as long as the user is offline,
```
Extra space

and just resend them when the user goes online again. For Google Analytics this is already available
[off-the-shelf through a Workbox module](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/workbox/modules/workbox-google-analytics),
but keep in mind that hits sent more than
[four hours deferred](https://developers.google.com/analytics/devguides/collection/protocol/v1/parameters#qt)
may not be processed. In its simplest form, it can be activated within a Workbox-based service
worker with these two lines:

> ```js

Author: We support code highlighting if you want to highlight lines in any of these samples: https://web.dev/handbook/markup-code/#code-highlighting

drop off your site quickly when the connection breaks away. But now you can at least measure and
quantify this, by comparing average session length and user engagement for users with the offline
dimension applied versus your regular users.

## SPAs and lazy loading

If users visiting a page built as a multi-page website go offline and try to navigate, the browser's
default offline page shows up, helping users understand what is happening. However, pages built as
single-page applications work differently. The user stays on the same page, and new content is
loaded dynamically through AJAX without any browser navigation. Users do not see the browser error
page when going offline. Instead, the dynamic parts of the page render with errors, go into
undefined states, or just stop being dynamic.

Similar effects can happen within multi-page websites due to lazy loading. For example, maybe the
initial load happened online, but the user went offline before scrolling. All lazy loaded content
below the fold will silently fail and be missing.

As these cases are really irritating to users, it makes sense to track them. Service workers are the

> perfect spot to catch network errors, and eventually track them using analytics. With Workbox, a
> [global catch handler](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/workbox/guides/advanced-recipes#comprehensive_fallbacks)
> can be configured to inform the page about failed requests by sending a message event:

Author: ```suggestion
perfect spot to catch network errors, and eventually track them using analytics. With Workbox,
you can configure a [global catch
handler](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/workbox/guides/advanced-recipes#comprehensive_fallbacks)
to inform the page about failed requests by sending a message event:
```
Avoiding the passive tense

```js
import { setCatchHandler } from 'workbox-routing';

setCatchHandler(({ event }) => {
  // https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Client/postMessage
  event.waitUntil(async function () {
    // Exit early if we don't have access to the client.

>     // Eg, if it's cross-origin.
>     if (!event.clientId) return;
> 
>     // Get the client.
>     const client = await clients.get(event.clientId);
>     // Exit early if we don't get the client.
>     // Eg, if it closed.

Author: ```suggestion
    // E.g. if it's cross-origin.
    if (!event.clientId) return;

    // Get the client.
    const client = await clients.get(event.clientId);
    // Exit early if we don't get the client.
    // E.g. if it closed.
```

    if (!client) return;

    // Send a message to the client.
    client.postMessage({

>       action: "network_fail",

Author: ```suggestion
      action: 'network_fail',
```

      url: event.request.url,
      destination: event.request.destination
    });

    return Response.error();

  }());
});
```

Rather than listening to all failed requests, another way is to catch errors on specific routes
only. As an example, if we want to report errors happening on routes to `/products/*` only, we can
add a check in `setCatchHandler` which filters the URI with a regular expression.  

> A cleaner solution is to implement registerRoute with a custom handler. This encapsulates the

Author: ```suggestion
A cleaner solution is to implement `registerRoute` with a custom handler. This encapsulates the
```

business logic into a separate route, with better maintainability in more complex service workers:

```js
import { registerRoute } from 'workbox-routing';
import { NetworkOnly } from 'workbox-strategies';

const networkOnly = new NetworkOnly();
registerRoute(
  new RegExp('https:\/\/example\.com\/products\/.+'),
  async (params) => {
    try {
      // Attempt a network request.
      return await networkOnly.handle(params);
    } catch (error) {
      // If it fails, report the error.
      const event = params.event;
      if (!event.clientId) return;
      const client = await clients.get(event.clientId);
      if (!client) return;

      client.postMessage({

>         action: "network_fail",
>         url: event.request.url,
>         destination: "products"

Author: ```suggestion
        action: 'network_fail',
        url: event.request.url,
        destination: 'products'
```

      });

      return Response.error();
    }
  }
);
```

As a final step, the page needs to listen to the `message` event, and send out the analytics ping.
Again, make sure to buffer analytics requests that happen offline within the service worker. As
described before, initialize the `workbox-google-analytics` plugin for built-in Google Analytics
support.

The following example uses Google Analytics, but can be applied in the same way for other analytics
vendors.

```js

> if ("serviceWorker" in navigator) {
>   // ... SW registration here
> 
>   // track offline error events
>   navigator.serviceWorker.addEventListener("message", event => {
>     if (gtag && event.data && event.data.action === "network_fail") {
>       gtag("event", "network_fail", {

Author: ```suggestion
if ('serviceWorker' in navigator) {
  // ... SW registration here

  // track offline error events
  navigator.serviceWorker.addEventListener('message', event => {
    if (gtag && event.data && event.data.action === 'network_fail') {
      gtag('event', 'network_fail', {
```
Other samples used single quotes

        event_category: event.data.destination,
        // event_label: event.data.url,
        // value: event.data.value
      });
    }
  });
}
```

> This will track failed resource loads in Google Analytics, where they can be analyzed with
> [reporting](https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/1033068?hl=en). The derived insight can be
> used to improve service worker caching and error handling in general, to make the page more robust
> and reliable under unstable network conditions.

Author: ```suggestion
This tracks failed resource loads in Google Analytics, where they can be analyzed with
[reporting](https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/1033068?hl=en). You can use the derived
insight to improve service worker caching and error handling in general, to make the page more robust
and reliable under unstable network conditions.
```
Avoiding future tense: https://web.dev/handbook/content-checklist/#present-tense

Avoiding passive tense
